---
layout: post
title: Management Wednesday- BPM Modeling - not charts anymore #bpm
date: 2012-07-15
categories: ["business process modeling", "scoping phase", "UML", "software engineering", "probabilistic graph modeling", "BlueWorks", "WebSphere", "multivariate analysis", "business process transparency", "mergers and acquisitions", "operational efficiency", "technology in business", "modeling versus reality"]
excerpt: After one has accomplished the scoping phase, then the team should move on to modeling. Due to the large amount of time spent scoping, many scenarios will come to light
---
After one has accomplished the scoping phase, then the team should move on to
modeling. Due to the large amount of time spent scoping, many scenarios will
come to light: "What if I have 50% of the resources to accomplish the same
task?" "What if we were successful only because of a natural disaster which
caused our competition's supply to dwindle?"

One's team will model how the process(es) might operate under different
assumptions, and multivariate scenarios. Thanks to the birth of the
transistor, it is becoming reality to be able to complete round-trip
engineering and simulations. Back in the 20th century, entities utilized PERT
diagrams, Gantt charts, and other interesting flow chart visual aides. A
thought leader took S. William's 1967 article about business process modeling
to create UML. UML is Unified Modeling Language. UML is commonly found in the
software engineering landscape. It wasn't until the 1990s when universities
started to teach UML. Personally, I use Octave in conjunction with
probabilistic graph modeling (statistical analysis tool and methodology,)
BlueWorks (SaaS based software,) and WebSphere (application) to get the
information my team needs at their finger tips whenever they need to "play
with the numbers" at any time / place.

At the most basic level, a capitalistic business process model is the base
model by which a corporation defines how a company generates revenue by its'
position in the value chain. Younger organizations will not spend much time
modeling because they are too busy trying to raise capital. Mature
organizations will spend too much time modeling. To what degree depends on the
analytical executive personas. "What if we spent X% more on lead generation?"
"What if we cross sold to our partner channel while reducing sales commissions
on our direct sales?"

A common business process model relies upon resource scenarios, capital
scenarios, and other multivariate analysis. Which will then feedback into
previous internal and industry metrics. The nifty part about modeling: as a
result, there will be transparency into business processes, as well as the
centralization of business process models and execution metrics. This is
extremely useful during mergers and acquisitions. With this clean slate, the
organization is able to fundamentally rethink how they accomplish their work
to improve some metric(s.) A few metrics one can look over; operational
expenditures improve customer satisfaction, remove redundant overhead,
increase competitive intelligence, and more. An interesting multiplier in this
clean state phase is the use of mature information services. Technology allows
entities to crunch numbers and crunch them fast. No longer does one have
buildings full of accountants to take over your competition with their
sailboat building.  Beware though: just because your models are sound does not
mean they will happen in real life.  [http://www.verisk.com/Verisk-
Review/Articles/The-U.S.-Mortgage-Crisis-What-
th...](http://www.verisk.com/Verisk-Review/Articles/The-U.S.-Mortgage-Crisis-
What-the-Models-Missed.html)


