---
layout: post
title: Security quotes
date: 2012-08-02
categories: ["security quotes", "NSA jokes", "software liability", "security product design", "internet security", "cryptography debates", "Bruce Schneier quotes", "government surveillance", "ethical hacking", "digital copyright", "cryptographic anecdotes", "system vulnerabilities"]
excerpt: The present need for security products far exceeds the number of individuals capable of designing secure systems
---
"Two can keep a secret if one is dead."

\-- Unknown

"How you can tell an extrovert from an introvert at NSA ? In the elevators?
The extroverts look at the OTHER guy's shoes."

\-- Steven Aftergood, e-mail to Cryptography mailing list, 6/11/02.

" There's no reason to treat software any differently from other products.
Today Firestone can produce a tire with a single systemic flaw and they're
liable, but Microsoft can produce an operating system with multiple systemic
flaws discovered per week and not be liable. This makes no sense, and it's the
primary reason security is so bad today. "

\-- Bruce Schneier, Cryptogram, 16/04/2002.

"The present need for security products far exceeds the number of individuals
capable of designing secure systems. Consequently, indust ry has resorted to
employing folks and purchasing "solutions" from vendors that shouldn't be let
near a project involving securing a system."

\-- Lucky Green

"The problem isn't the Internet. The problem is the horribly insecure
computers attached to the Internet. I would rather rewrite Windows than
TCP/IP."

\-- Bruce Scheier, Netcraft interview, 13/8/04.

"People who are willing to rely on the government to ke ep them safe are
pretty much standing on Darwin's mat, pounding on the door, scr eaming, 'Take
me, take me!'"

\-- Carl Jacobs, Alt.Sysadmin.Recovery

"When stopping a terrorist attack or seeking to recover a kidnapped child,
encountering encryption may mean the difference between success and
catastrophic failures"

\-- Janet Reno, Sept 99. Or in plain English "When trying to commit economic
espionage and illegaly spying on our citizens, encountering encryption...."

"What makes you think you can invent a good cipher if y ou have no expertise
in the subject? Maybe you can, but it's not terribly likely. Imagine how you
would react if your doctor told you "You have appendicitis, a disease that is
life-threatening if not treated. We have a time-tested cure that cures 99% of
all patients with no noticeable side-effects, but I'm not going to give you
that: I'm going to give you a new experimental treatment my cousin dreamed up
last week. No, my cousin has no medical training. No, I have no evidence that
the new treatment will work, and it's never been tested or analyzed in depth
-- but I'm going to give it to you anyway because my cousin thinks it is good
stuff." You'd find another doctor, I hope. Rational people leave medical care
to the medical experts. The medical experts have a much better track record
than the quacks."

\-- David Wagner PhD, sci.crypt, 19th Oct 02.

"History has taught us: never underestimate the amount of money, time, and
effort someone will expend to thwart a security system. It's always better to
assume the worst. Assume your adversaries are better than they are. Assume
science and technology will soon be able to do things they cannot yet. Give
yourself a margin for error. Give yourself more security than you need today.
When the unexpected happens, you'll be glad you did."

\-- Bruce Schneier.

"I believed then, and continue to believe now, that the benefits to our
security and freedom of widely available cryptography far, far outweigh the
inevitable damage that comes from its use by criminals and terrorists...I
believed, and continue to believe, that the arguments against widely available
cryptography, while certainly advanced by people of good will, did not hold up
against the cold light of reason and were inconsistent with the most basic
American values."

\-- Matt Blaze, AT&T Labs, Sept 01.

"The more corrupt the state, the more numerous the laws "

\-- Tacitus

"Every time I write about the impossibility of effectiv ely protecting digital
files on a general-purpose computer, I get responses from people decrying the
death of copyright. "How will authors and artists get paid for their work?"
they ask me. Truth be told, I don't know. I feel rather like the physicist who
just explained relativity to a group of would-be interstellar travelers, only
to be asked: "How do you expect us to get to the stars, then?" I'm sorry, but
I don't know that, either.'' "

\-- Bruce Schneier, Cryptogram 15 Aug 01.

"$_='while(read+STDIN,$_,2048) {$a=29;$c=142; if((@a=unx"C*",$_) [20]&48)
{$h=5;$_=unxb24,join"",@b=map{xB8,unxb8, chr($_^$a[--$h+84])}
@ARGV;s/...$/1$&/;$d=unxV,xb25,$_;$b=73;$e=256|
(ord$b[4])<<9|ord$b[3];$d=$d>>8^($f=($t=255)& ($d>>12^$d>>4^$d^$d/8))<<17,
$e=$e>>8^($t&($g=($q=$e>>14&7^$e) ^$q*8^$q<<6))<<9,$_=(map
{$_%16or$t^=$c^=($m=(11,10,116,100,11,122,20,100) [$_/16%8])&110;$t^=(72,
@z=(64,72,$a^=12*($_%16-2?0:$m&17)) ,$b^=$_%64?12:0,@z)[$_%8]}(16..271))
[$_]^(( $h>>=8)+=$f+(~$g&$t)) for@a[128..$#a]}print+x"C*",@a}';
s/x/pack+/g;eval"

\-- D e C S S in PERL

"Cryptography is like literacy in the Dark Ages. Infini tely potent, for good
and ill... yet basically an intellectual construct, an idea, which by its
nature will resist efforts to restrict it to bureaucrats and others who deem
only themselves worthy of such Privilege."

\-- "A Thinking Man's Creed for Crypto", Vin McLellan.

"This is by-design behavior, not a security vulnerability. "

\-- Scott Culp, Microsoft Security Response Center, discussing the hole
allowing ILOVEU to propogate, 5/5/00.

"Paranoia is our profession."

\-- Strategic Air command

"a trusted system is one which, when it breaks, can break your security policy
"

\-- Bob Morris, NSA.

​


