---
layout: post
title: Startup Comp Structure
date: 2013-06-05
categories: ["startup compensation", "equity compensation", "executive recruitment", "venture capital", "cash vs stock compensation", "benefits program", "stock options", "employee motivation", "startup challenges", "creative compensation strategies", "benefits customization"]
excerpt: You
---
You’ve decided to start a company. Your business plan is based on sound
strategy and thorough market research. Your background and training have
prepared you for the challenge. Now you must assemble the quality management
team that venture investors demand. So you begin the search for a topflight
engineer to head product development and a seasoned manager to handle
marketing, sales, and distribution.

Attracting these executives is easier said than done. You’ve networked your
way to just the marketing candidate you need: a vice president with the right
industry experience and an aggressive business outlook. But she makes $100,000
a year in a secure job at a large company. You can’t possibly commit that much
cash, even if you do raise outside capital. How do you structure a
compensation package that will lure her away? How much cash is reasonable? How
much and what type of stock should the package include? Is there any way to
match the array of benefits—retirement plans, child-care assistance, savings
programs—her current employer provides? In short, what kind of compensation
and benefits program will attract, motivate, and retain this marketing vice
president and other key executives while not jeopardizing the fragile finances
of your startup business?

Selecting appropriate compensation and benefits policies is a critical
challenge for companies of all sizes. But never are the challenges more
difficult—or the stakes higher—than when a company first takes shape. Startups
must strike a delicate balance. Unrealistically low levels of cash
compensation weaken their ability to attract quality managers. Unrealistically
high levels of cash compensation can turn off potential investors and, in
extreme cases, threaten the solvency of the business. How to proceed?

First, be realistic about the limitations. There is simply no way that a
company just developing a prototype or shipping product for less than a year
or generating its first black ink after several money-losing years of building
the business can match the current salaries and benefits offered by
established competitors. At the same time, there are real advantages to being
small. Without an entrenched personnel bureaucracy and long-standing
compensation policies, it is easier to tailor salaries and benefits to
individual needs. Creativity and flexibility are at a premium.

Second, be thorough and systematic about analyzing the options. Compensation
and benefits plans can be expensive to design, install, administer, and
terminate. A program that is inappropriate or badly conceived can be a very
costly mistake. Startups should evaluate compensation and benefits
alternatives from four distinct perspectives.

_How do they affect cash flow?_  Survival is the first order of business for a
new company. Even if you have raised an initial round of equity financing,
there is seldom enough working capital to go around. Research and development,
facilities and equipment, and marketing costs all make priority claims on
resources. Cash compensation must be a lower priority. Despite this awkward
tension (the desperate need to attract first-rate talent without having the
cash to pay them market rates), marshaling resources for pressing business
needs must remain paramount.

_What are the tax implications?_  Compensation and benefits choices have major
tax consequences for a startup company and its executives; startups can use
the tax code to maximum advantage in compensation decisions. Certain
approaches, like setting aside assets to secure deferred compensation
liabilities, require that executives declare the income immediately and the
company deduct it as a current expense. Other approaches, like leaving
deferred compensation liabilities unsecured, allow executives to declare the
income later while the company takes a future deduction. Many executives value
the option of deferring taxable income more than the security of immediate
cash. And since most startups have few, if any, profits to shield from taxes,
deferring deductions may appeal to them as well.

_What is the accounting impact?_  Most companies on their way to an initial
public offering or a sellout to a larger company must register particular
earning patterns. Different compensation programs affect the income statement
in very different ways. One service company in the startup stage adopted an
insurance-backed salary plan for its key executives. The plan bolstered the
company’s short-term cash flow by deferring salary payments (it also deferred
taxable income for those executives). But it would have meant heavy charges to
book earnings over the deferral period—charges that might have interfered with
the company’s plans to go public. So management backed out of the program at
the eleventh hour.

_What is the competition doing?_  No startup is an island, especially when
vying for talented executives. Companies must factor regional and industry
trends into their compensation and benefits calculations. One newly
established law firm decided not to offer new associates a 401(k) plan. (This
program allows employees to contribute pretax dollars into a savings fund that
also grows tax-free. Many employers match a portion of their employees’
contributions.) The firm quickly discovered that it could not attract top
candidates without the plan; it had become a staple of the profession in that
geographic market. So it established a 401(k) and assumed the administrative
costs, but it saved money by not including a matching provision right away.

Events at a Boston software company illustrate the potential for flexibility
in startup compensation. The company’s three founders had worked together at a
previous employer. They had sufficient personal resources to contribute assets
and cash to the new company in exchange for founders’ stock. They decided to
forgo cash compensation altogether for the first year.

Critical to the company’s success were five software engineers who would write
code for the first product. It did not make sense for the company to raise
venture capital to pay the engineers their market-value salaries. Yet their
talents were essential if the company were to deliver the software on time.

The obvious solution: supplement cash compensation with stock. But two
problems arose. The five prospects had unreasonably high expectations about
how much stock they should receive. Each demanded 5% to 10% of the company,
which, if granted, would have meant transferring excessive ownership to them.
Moreover, while they were equal in experience and ability and therefore worth
equal salaries, each had different cash requirements to meet their obligations
and maintain a reasonable life-style. One of the engineers was single and had
few debts; he was happy to go cash-poor and bank on the company’s growth. One
of his colleagues, however, had a wife and young child at home and needed the
security of a sizable paycheck.

The founders devised a solution to meet the needs of the company and its
prospective employees. They consulted other software startups and documented
that second-tier employees typically received 1% to 3% ownership stakes. After
some negotiation, they settled on a maximum of 2% for each of the five
engineers. Then they agreed on a formula by which these employees could trade
cash for stock during their first three years. For every $1,000 in cash an
engineer received over a base figure, he or she forfeited a fixed number of
shares. The result: all five engineers signed on, the company stayed within
its cash constraints, and the founders gave up a more appropriate 7% of the
company’s equity.

## Cash vs. Stock

Equity is the great compensation equalizer in startup companies—the bridge
between an executive’s market value and the company’s cash constraints. And
there are endless variations on the equity theme: restricted shares, incentive
stock options, nonqualified options, stock appreciation rights (SARs), phantom
stock, and the list goes on. This dizzying array of choices notwithstanding,
startup companies face three basic questions. Does it make sense to grant key
executives an equity interest? If so, should the company use restricted stock,
options, or some combination of both? If not, does it make sense to reward
executives based on the company’s appreciating share value or to devise
formulas based on different criteria?

Let’s consider these questions one at a time. Some company founders are
unwilling to part with much ownership at inception. And with good reason.
Venture capitalists or other outside investors will demand a healthy share of
equity in return for a capital infusion. Founders rightly worry about diluting
their control before obtaining venture funds.

Alternatives in this situation include SARs and phantom shares—programs that
allow key employees to benefit from the company’s increasing value without
transferring voting power to them. No shares actually trade hands; the company
compensates its executives to reflect the appreciation of its stock. Many
executives prefer these programs to outright equity ownership because they
don’t have to invest their own money. They receive the financial benefits of
owning stock without the risk of buying shares. In return, of course, they
forfeit the rights and privileges of ownership. These programs can get
complicated, however, and they require thorough accounting reviews. Reporting
rules for artificial stock plans are very restrictive and sometimes create
substantial charges against earnings.

Some founders take the other extreme. In the interest of saving cash, they
award bits of equity at every turn. This can create real problems. When it
comes to issuing stock, startups should always be careful not to sell the
store before they fill the shelves. That is, they should award shares to key
executives and second-tier employees in a way that protects the long-term
company interest. And these awards should take place only after the company
has fully distributed stock to the founders.

The choice of whether to issue actual or phantom shares should also be
consistent with the company’s strategy. If the goal is to realize the “big
payoff” within three to five years through an initial public offering or
outright sale of the company, then stock may be the best route. You can
motivate employees to work hard and build the company’s value since they can
readily envision big personal rewards down the road.

The founder of a temporary employment agency used this approach to attract and
motivate key executives. He planned from the start to sell the business once
it reached critical mass, and let his key executives know his game plan. He
also allowed them to buy shares at a discount. When he sold the business a few
years later for $10 million, certain executives, each of whom had been allowed
to buy up to 4% of the company, received as much as $400,000. The lure of
cashing out quickly was a great motivator for this company’s top executives.

For companies that plan to grow more slowly over the first three to five
years, resist acquisition offers, and maintain private ownership, the stock
alternative may not be optimal. Granting shares in a company that may never be
sold or publicly traded is a bit like giving away play money. Worthless paper
can actually be a demotivator for employees.

In such cases, it may make sense to create an artificial market for stock.
Companies can choose among various book-value plans, under which they offer to
buy back shares issued to employees according to a pricing formula. Such plans
establish a measurement mechanism based on company performance—like book
value, earnings, return on assets or equity—that determines the company’s per-
share value. As with phantom shares and SARs, book-value plans require a
thorough accounting review.

If a company does decide to issue shares, the next question is how to do it.
Restricted stock is one alternative. Restricted shares most often require that
an executive remain with the company for a specified time period or forfeit
the equity, thus creating “golden handcuffs” to promote long-term service. The
executive otherwise enjoys all the rights of other shareholders, except for
the right to sell any stock still subject to restriction.

Stock options are another choice, and they generally come in two forms:
incentive stock options (ISOs) and nonqualified stock options (NSOs). As with
restricted shares, stock options can create golden handcuffs. Most options,
whether ISOs or NSOs, involve a vesting schedule. Executives may receive
options on 1,000 shares of stock, but only 25% of the options vest (i.e.,
executives can exercise them) in any one year. If an executive leaves the
company, he or she loses the unexercised options. Startups often prefer ISOs
since they give executives a timing advantage with respect to taxes.
Executives pay no taxes on any capital gains until they sell or exchange the
stock, and then only if they realize a profit over the exercise price. ISOs,
however, give the company no tax deductions—which is not a major drawback for
startups that don’t expect to earn big profits for several years. Of course,
if companies generate taxable income before their executives exercise their
options, lack of a deduction is a definite negative.

ISOs have other drawbacks. Tax laws impose stiff technical requirements on how
much stock can be subject to options, the maximum exercise period, who can
receive options, and how long stock must be held before it can be sold.
Moreover, the exercise price of an ISO cannot be lower than the fair market
value of the stock on the date the option is granted. (Shares need not be
publicly traded for them to have a fair market value. Private companies
estimate the market value of their stock.)

For these and other reasons, companies usually issue NSOs as well as ISOs.
NSOs can be issued at a discount to current market value. They can be issued
to directors and consultants (who cannot receive ISOs) as well as to company
employees. And they have different tax consequences for the issuing company,
which can deduct the spread between the exercise price and the market price of
the shares when the options are exercised.

NSOs can also play a role in deferred compensation programs. More and more
startups are following the lead of larger companies by allowing executives to
defer cash compensation with stock options. They grant NSOs at a below-market
exercise price that reflects the amount of salary deferred. Unlike standard
deferral plans, where cash is paid out on some unalterable future date (thus
triggering automatic tax liabilities), the option approach gives executives
control over when and how they will be taxed on their deferred salary. The
company, meanwhile, can deduct the spread when its executives exercise their
options.

One small but growing high-tech company used a combination of stock techniques
to achieve several compensation goals simultaneously. It issued NSOs with an
exercise price equal to fair market value (most NSOs are issued at a
discount). All the options were exercisable immediately (most options have a
vesting schedule). Finally, the company placed restrictions on the resale of
stock purchased with options.

This program allowed for maximum flexibility. Executives with excess cash
could exercise all their options right away; executives with less cash, or who
wanted to wait for signs of the company’s progress, could wait months or years
to exercise. The plan provided the company with tax deductions on any options
exercised in the future (assuming the fair market value at exercise exceeded
the stock’s fair market value when the company granted the options) and
avoided any charges to book earnings in the process. And the resale
restrictions created golden handcuffs without forcing executives to wait to
buy their shares.

## The Benefits Challenge

No startup can match the cradle-to-grave benefits offered by employers like
IBM or General Motors, although young companies may have to attract executives
from these giant companies. It is also true, however, that the executives most
attracted to startup opportunities may be people for whom standard benefit
packages are relatively unimportant. Startup companies have special
opportunities for creativity and customization with employee benefits. The
goal should not be to come as close to what IBM offers without going broke,
but to devise low-cost, innovative programs that meet the needs of a small
employee corps.

Of course, certain basic needs must be met. Group life insurance is important,
although coverage levels should start small and increase as the company gets
stronger. Group medical is also essential, although there are many ways to
limit its cost. Setting higher-than-average deductibles lowers employer
premiums (the deductibles can be adjusted downward as financial stability
improves). Self-insuring smaller claims also conserves cash. One young company
saved 25% on its health-insurance premiums by self-insuring the first $500 of
each claim and paying a third party to administer the coverage.

The list of traditional employee benefits doesn’t have to stop here—but it
probably should. Most companies should not adopt long-term disability
coverage, dental plans, child-care assistance, even retirement plans, until
they are well beyond the startup phase. This is a difficult reality for many
founders to accept, especially those who have broken from larger companies
with generous benefit programs. But any program has costs—and costs of any
kind are a critical worry for a new company trying to move from the red into
the black. Indeed, one startup in the business of developing and operating
progressive child-care centers wisely decided to wait for greater financial
stability before offering its own employees child-care benefits.

Many young companies underestimate the money and time it takes just to
administer benefit programs, let alone fund them. Employee benefits do not run
on automatic pilot. While the vice president of marketing watches marketing,
the CFO keeps tabs on finances, and the CEO snuffs out the fires that always
threaten to engulf a young company, who is left to mind the personnel store?
If a substantial benefits program is in place, someone has to handle the day-
to-day administrative details and update the program as the accounting and tax
rules change. The best strategy is to keep benefits modest at first and make
them more comprehensive as the company moves toward profitability.

Which is not to suggest that the only answer to benefits is setting strict
limits. Other creative policies may not only cost less but they also may
better suit the interests and needs of executive recruits. Take company-
supplied lunches. One startup computer company thought it was important to
create a “think-tank” atmosphere. So it set up writing boards in the
cafeteria, provided all employees with daily lunches from various ethnic
restaurants, and encouraged spirited noontime discussions.

Certainly, Thai food is no substitute for a generous pension. But benefits
that promote a creative and energetic office environment may matter more to
employees than savings plans whose impact may not be felt for decades. One
startup learned this lesson after it polled its employees. It was prepared to
offer an attractive—and costly—401(k) program until a survey disclosed that
employees preferred a much different benefit: employer-paid membership at a
local health club. The company gladly obliged.

Deciding on compensation policies for startup companies means making tough
choices. There is an inevitable temptation, as a company shows its first signs
of growth and financial stability, to enlarge salaries and benefits toward
market levels. You should resist these temptations. As your company heads
toward maturity, so can your compensation and benefits programs. But the
wisest approach is to go slowly, to make enhancements incrementally, and to be
aware at all times of the cash flow, taxation, and accounting implications of
the choices you face.


